# RSB, 4

First of all, love the Lord God with all your whole heart, your whole soul and
all you strength, and love your neighbor as yourself. Then the following: You
are not to kill, not to commit adultery; you are not to steal nor to covet; you
are not to bear false witness. You must honor everyone, and never do to another
what you do not want done to yourself.

Renounce yourself in order to follow Christ; discipline your body; do not pamper
yourself, but love fasting. You must relieve the lot of the poor, clothe the
naked, visit the sick, and bury the dead. Go to help the troubled and console
the sorrowing.

Your way of acting should be different from the world’s way; the love of Christ
must come before all else. You are not to act in anger or nurse a grudge. Rid
your heart of all deceit. Never give a hollow greeting of peace or turn away
when someone needs your love. Bind yourself to no oath lest it prove false, but
speak the truth with heart and tongue.

Do not repay one bad turn with another. Do not injure anyone, but bear injuries
patiently. Love your enemies. If people curse you, do not curse them back but
bless them instead. Endure persecution for the sake of justice.

You must not be proud, nor given to wine. Refrain from too much eating or
sleeping, and from laziness. Do not grumble or speak ill of others.

Place your hope in God alone. If you notice something good in yourself, give
credit to God, not to yourself, but be certain that the evil you commit is
always your own and yours to acknowledge. Live in fear of judgement day and have
a great horror of hell. Yearn for everlasting life with holy desire. Day by day
remind yourself that you are going to die. Hour by hour keep careful watch over
all you do, aware that God’s gaze is upon you, wherever you may be. As soon as
wrongful thoughts come into your heart, dash them against Christ and disclose
them to your spiritual father. Guard your lips from harmful or deceptive speech.
Prefer moderation in speech and speak no foolish chatter, nothing just to
provoke laughter; do not love immoderate or boisterous laughter.

Listen readily to holy reading, and devote yourself often to prayer. Every day
with tears and sighs confess your past sins to God in prayer and change from
these evil ways in the future. Do not gratify the promptings of the flesh; hate
the urgings of self-will. Obey the orders of the abbot unreservedly, even if his
own conduct — which God forbid — be at odds with what he says. Remember the
teaching of the Lord: Do what they say, not what they do.

Do not aspire to be called holy before you really are, but first be holy that
you may more truly be called so. Live by God’s commandments every day; treasure
chasitity, harbor neither hatred nor jealousy of anyone, and do nothing out of
envy. Do not love quarreling; shun arrogance; Respect the elders and love the
young. Pray for your enemies out of love for Christ. If you have a dispute with
someone make peace with him before the sun goes down.

And finally never lose hope in God’s mercy.

These, then, are the tools of the spiritual craft. When we have used them
without ceasing day and night and have returned them on judgement day, our wages
will be the reward the Lord has promised; What the eye has not seen nor the ear
heard, God has prepared for those who love him.

The workshop where we are to toil faithfully at all these tasks is in the
enclosure of the monastery and stability in the community.
